Title: PKR-QA: A Benchmark for Procedural Knowledge Reasoning with Knowledge Module Learning

URL Source: https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/download/39638/43599

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# PKR-QA: A Benchmark for Procedural Knowledge Reasoning with Knowledge Module Learning 

# Thanh-Son Nguyen *2 , Hong Yang *1,2 , Tzeh Yuan Neoh *1,4 , Hao Zhang *1,2 , Ee Yeo Keat 1,2 ,Basura Fernando 1,2,3 

> 1

Centre for Frontier AI Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore 

> 2

Institute of High Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore 

> 3

College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore  

> 4

Harvard University Nguyen Thanh Son@a-star.edu.sg, Fernando Basura@a-star.edu.sg. 

Abstract 

We introduce PKR-QA ( Procedural Knowledge Reasoning Question Answering ), a new benchmark for question answer-ing over procedural tasks that require structured reasoning. PKR-QA is constructed semi-automatically using a proce-dural knowledge graph (PKG), which encodes task-specific knowledge across diverse domains. The PKG is built by cu-rating and linking information from the COIN instructional video dataset and the ontology, enriched with commonsense knowledge from ConceptNet and structured outputs from Large Language Models (LLMs), followed by manual veri-fication. To generate question-answer pairs, we design graph traversal templates where each template is applied systemati-cally over PKG. To enable interpretable reasoning, we pro-pose a neurosymbolic approach called Knowledge Module Learning (KML), which learns procedural relations via neu-ral modules and composes them for structured reasoning with LLMs. Experiments demonstrate that this paradigm improves reasoning performance on PKR-QA and enables step-by-step reasoning traces that facilitate interpretability. 

Code & Dataset —https://github.com/LUNAProject22/KML 

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14957 

# Introduction 

Interest in understanding procedural tasks is growing, driven by applications in cooking, machinery repair, medical pro-cedures, and daily activities (Ashutosh et al. 2024), as re-flected by platforms like WikiHow. Such tasks consist of sequences of steps, where each step serves a specific pur-pose and tools are used accordingly. Human understand-ing of these tasks arises from lifelong learning, enriched by commonsense knowledge of objects and their affordances, as well as the ability to reason about temporal and causal dependencies within multi-step processes. This enables in-dividuals to infer not just what to do, but why and how each step contributes to the overarching goal. Emulating this pro-

> *

These authors contributed equally. Copyright © 2026, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved. 

cedural knowledge reasoning is essential for machines to as-sist in complex real-world tasks. Despite the rise of visual question answering and general knowledge-based benchmarks, there remains a gap in evalu-ating a model’s ability to perform procedural knowledge rea-soning. To address this, we introduce PKR-QA ( Procedural Knowledge Reasoning Question Answering ), a new bench-mark designed to assess Vision Language Models (VLMs) and Neurosymbolic (NS) methods on diverse procedural reasoning capabilities, including multi-hop, deductive, prob-abilistic, contextual, causal, and counterfactual reasoning. Many procedural tasks require domain-specific knowledge and an understanding of task structures, which can be ef-fectively captured using knowledge graphs. To construct the PKR-QA questions and answers, we build a procedu-ral knowledge graph (PKG) that encodes temporal relation-ships and causal links among key concepts. Our dataset chal-lenges models to answer procedural questions by combining information from the video with external knowledge about the task. Unlike previous video QA benchmarks that primar-ily test visual comprehension, i.e., reasoning over what is in the video, our dataset emphasizes task-centric reasoning and knowledge grounded in the procedure. This introduces new challenges that jointly demands visual understanding, visual reasoning, and procedural knowledge reasoning. While VLMs demonstrate impressive reasoning and knowledge capabilities, their internal reasoning mechanism is not that transparent. Techniques like chain-of-thought, graph-of-thought, and tree-of-thought aim to enhance VLM reasoning (Wei et al. 2022; Besta et al. 2024; Yao et al. 2023), yet the reasoning remains implicit due to the lack of constraints on intermediate variables. Moreover, reasoning and execution are often entangled within the VLM’s inter-nal mechanism. To address this, methods like ViperGPT de-couple reasoning from execution by generating executable programs. Inspired by such approaches and neurosymbolic (NS) models (Johnson et al. 2017; Mascharka et al. 2018; Andreas et al. 2016; Perez et al. 2018; Hudson and Manning 2019, 2018; Chen et al. 2021; Endo et al. 2023), we pro-pose Knowledge Module Learning (KML), which models knowledge-based relations as parameterized, trainable mod-The Fortieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-26) 

24549 ules leveraging on modern embeddings. KML generates the program of knowledge modules to answer knowledge-based reasoning questions as compositions of knowledge modules using the PKG schema and LLMs. KML explicitly answers knowledge-based reasoning questions leveraging the pow-erful reasoning mechanism of moderns LLMs allowing it to execute reasoning steps in a more transparent manner to derive the answer. KML supports explicit knowledge-based reasoning, constrained to a well-defined set of knowledge operations, plays a crucial role beyond procedural tasks in domains that require structured decision-making, reliabil-ity, and interpretability. KML provides explicit reasoning steps that can be systematically verified, debugged, and re-fined. Unlike end-to-end black-box models, which often lack transparency in their decision-making, structured reasoning through predefined operations enables more interpretable, trustworthy, and controllable AI systems. Our dataset and the approach promote these aspects. Our contributions are three-fold. First, we introduce PKR-QA, a new benchmark to test procedural knowledge rea-soning by question answering. Second, we propose KML, a neuro-symbolic method that executes LLM-generated pro-grams over knowledge graphs using relation-specific neural modules. Third, we benchmark PKR-QA with state-of-the-art VLMs and NS methods. KML variants outperform all baselines, highlighting the benefit of structured knowledge for interpretable and controllable procedural reasoning. We believe PKR-QA will serve as a valuable resource to ad-vance trustworthy AI in this emerging domain. 

# Related Work 

Understanding procedural and instructional videos remains a significant challenge in computer vision. The authors in (Ashutosh et al. 2024) introduced the key step recogni-tion and procedure-aware video representation learning ap-proach using step transitions is presented in (Zhou et al. 2023). We leverage on these works. Knowledge-based Vi-sual Question Answering has become popular in recent years. The majority of the past benchmarks on knowledge-based visual question answering are for images while more recently authors in (Wang et al. 2024) presented a bench-mark to evaluate situated and open-world common-sense reasoning in videos with compositionality, temporality, and causality (Parmar et al. 2024). While the motivation of our work shares similarities with (Wang et al. 2024), there are notable distinctions. Their focus lies in situated common-sense reasoning grounded in the specific contexts depicted in videos, whereas we concentrate on testing the procedural un-derstanding of models given some partial information such as a step of a task. Integrating External Knowledge with Video Understanding has been explored through knowl-edge graphs (KGs) for tasks like activity recognition (Ma et al. 2022) and visual commonsense reasoning (Lin et al. 2019). VidSitu (Sadhu et al. 2021) links events to seman-tic roles, while TVQA+(Lei et al. 2019) uses script knowl-edge for story-based QA. However, these works focus on descriptive reasoning rather than procedural reasoning. Neu-rosymbolic frameworks like ViperGPT (Sur´ ıs, Menon, and Vondrick 2023), MoreVqa (Min et al. 2024) and (Choud-hury et al. 2024) decouple reasoning (e.g., program gen-eration) from execution (e.g., API calls). While ViperGPT uses predefined functions for visual queries, it lacks mecha-nisms to learn domain-specific knowledge modules or con-strain reasoning to procedural logic. Similarly, chain-of-thought prompting (Wei et al. 2022) improves transparency in LLMs/VLMs but remains dependent on the model’s in-ternal knowledge, which may be unreliable for special-ized domains. Our framework advances this by (1) train-ing lightweight, interpretable Knowledge Modules directly from a domain specific KG and (2) constraining reasoning to predefined operations ensuring alignment with domain knowledge. Our work is also related to (Zhong et al. 2024; Shah et al. 2024), which employ logical queries to extract information from a KG. This emphasis on curated, domain-specific knowledge is especially valuable for AI assistants operating in contexts where domain expertise, rather than general commonsense reasoning, is crucial for success. Prior knowledge completion works that learns embeddings of en-tities and relations in KGs are also related to us (Bordes et al. 2013; Wang et al. 2014). In contrast, KML utilizes em-beddings to learn relational mappings, employing a separate neural network for each relation through contrastive learn-ing. 

# PKG Construction and Dataset Creation 

Motivated by recent advances in the semi-automated con-struction of knowledge-based question answering datasets (Hoang et al. 2024), we introduce the Procedural Knowl-edge Reasoning Question Answering (PKR-QA) dataset. It is built on a Procedural Knowledge Graph (PKG) that in-tegrates information from the COIN training set, the COIN ontology, GPT-4o-generated annotations, and external com-monsense knowledge from ConceptNet, followed by hu-man verification. To enable systematic QA generation, we define a set of question templates and associated Cypher queries (Francis et al. 2018), which are executed over the knowledge graph to retrieve correct answers. In the follow-ing sections, we detail the construction of both the knowl-edge graph and the QA dataset. 

Defining PKG’s Schema (PKGS). A knowledge graph schema provides a high-level abstraction of the graph, spec-ifying the types of entities that exist and the valid relation-ships that can occur between them. It serves as a blueprint for structuring the data and interpreting the semantics of the graph. In our case, PKGS contains nodes where each node correspond to an entity type ( E) and edges represent relation types ( R) (Figure 1). The core entity types in PKGS include 

Domain , Task , Step , Action , Object , Tool , and Purpose . Re-lation types capture meaningful procedural links, such as task-step associations or tool usage (e.g. HAS TOOL ), and may carry attributes like id , type , or additional semantic metadata. 

Populating PKG. Based on this schema, we instantiate PKG by populating it with specific entity and relation in-stances. Each entity e ∈ E has three main attributes: type ,

name , and id . Relations r ∈ R represent specific con-nections between entity instances. To construct this graph, 24550 Figure 1: (Left) Schema of the Procedural Knowledge Graph (PKG). Middle: Traversal templates. Right: Corresponding ques-tions. Blue text indicates information grounded in the input video. Red text denotes the target answer node. we integrate annotations from the COIN dataset (Tang et al. 2019), fine-grained information extracted using GPT-4o (Hurst et al. 2024), and commonsense knowledge from ConceptNet (Speer, Chin, and Havasi 2017). 

COIN-based Data (Domain, Task, Step ): We ex-tract the procedural structure from the training split of the COIN dataset, which provides annotations for domains, tasks, and steps. For each unique instance of these enti-ties, we create corresponding nodes in the graph. We define 

HAS TASK edges to link each domain to its associated tasks, and HAS STEP edges to connect tasks to their constituent steps. To capture procedural flow, we analyze step sequences from all training videos and construct HAS NEXT STEP re-lations that represent the temporal ordering of steps. Addi-tionally, we introduce special START and END nodes to ex-plicitly mark task boundaries. Each HAS NEXT STEP edge is annotated with its observed frequency to model empirical transition likelihoods between steps. 

LLM-Augmented Data (Action, Object, Tool ): To enhance procedural specificity, we use GPT-4o to ex-tract action-object pairs from step descriptions. For instance, the phrase “remove the tire” yields the action “remove” and the object “tire”. Because COIN lacks explicit tool annota-tions, we further prompt GPT-4o to infer potential tools for each step. The tool lists are manually verified. We standard-ize terms (e.g., “scissor” → “scissors”), consolidate dupli-cates (e.g., “marker”, “marker pen”), and unify task-specific variants (e.g., “toilet detergent” → “detergent”). Some task-sensitive distinctions are preserved (e.g., “filter” → “coffee filter”) when relevant to the procedural context. 

ConceptNet-based Data (Purpose ): In procedural tasks, actions are typically performed—and tools or objects used—with specific purposes. To represent such intent in our graph, we incorporate commonsense knowledge from Con-ceptNet, a large-scale semantic network that connects words and phrases through meaningful, human-readable relations such as UsedFor , CapableOf , and IsA . Specifically, we extract potential purposes of actions, tools, and objects us-ing the UsedFor and CapableOf relations. To contex-tualize these purposes within specific procedural steps and tasks, we use GPT-4o to infer task- and step-specific inter-pretations for each entity’s purpose –see the prompt template in (Nguyen et al. 2025) for more details. This step ensures that the resulting knowledge is not generic but grounded in the procedural context in which the entity is used. To reduce redundancy and merge semantically simi-lar purposes, we compute pairwise cosine similarities of Sentence-BERT embeddings (Reimers and Gurevych 2019) and apply a similarity threshold of 0.8, validated through manual inspection. Pairs of highly similar purposes are linked using a HAS SIMILAR PURPOSE edge. The result-ing purpose-augmented graph is stored in Neo4j 1, support-ing efficient querying and reasoning via Cypher. All contents are manually verified to ensure the reliability of the KG. The constructed KG contains 2,954 unique entities and 12,484 relations. Detailed distributions of entities and relations are shown in (Nguyen et al. 2025). PKR-QA is a multiple-choice question answering dataset designed to evaluate reasoning over procedural knowledge in instructional videos. Each instance consists of a video segment, a question, five answer choices, and one correct answer. Unlike traditional video QA datasets that focus on grounding answers directly in the visual content of a sin-gle video, PKR-QA emphasizes reasoning over procedural knowledge that extends beyond the given video. 

Traversal Templates for Procedural Reasoning We de-fine questions in PKR-QA based on traversal templates which are specific reasoning patterns over PKG. For in-stance, the traversal Step HAS TOOL 

−−−−−−→ Tool HAS PURPOSE 

−−−−−−−−→

Purpose corresponds to the question: “What is the purpose 

> 1https://neo4j.com/ 24551

of the tool used in this step?”. We design 17 such traver-sal templates to cover a wide range of procedural reasoning types. For each template, we generate multiple question vari-ants using GPT-4o-mini, followed by manual filtering to en-sure quality and clarity. These templates form the backbone for producing diverse yet semantically consistent question-answer instances. Figure 1 presents examples of Traver-sal Templates alongside their corresponding questions. The complete set of 17 question templates with example ques-tions is provided in (Nguyen et al. 2025). 

Question and Answer Generation We generate ques-tions by aligning each video segment with its correspond-ing Task and Step nodes in PKG, then apply traversal templates to form questions and retrieve answers. For each question, we sample one correct answer and four distractors. To ensure balanced answer distributions and reduce bias, we apply sampling strategies that equalize the frequency of each answer candidate across correct and incorrect options. Each question is paired with a Cypher query that retrieves sup-porting facts from PKG. These structured annotations serve as logical forms for KG-based evaluation, model supervi-sion, and reasoning trace analysis. PKR-QA is designed for scenarios with limited training data but having access to structured knowledge, such as a knowledge graph. We construct a training set of 1,700 sam-ples (100 per traversal template) and a validation set of 850 samples (50 per template). The test set contains 46,921 ques-tions, generated from all video segments in the COIN test split. This setup supports zero- and few-shot generalization. To assess the quality of our dataset, we evaluate whether a question can be reasonably answered by a human—referred to as plausibility . We conducted a case study with eight participants, each answering a subset of 170 questions. For each question, participants were shown a video segment, the question, and five answer options, and were asked to se-lect the correct answer. Each question was independently answered by three participants. A question is considered plausible if at least one participant selected the correct an-swer. Using this criterion, we found that 92.4% of the ques-tions are plausible. Additionally, random baselines perform at chance level ( ∼ 20 % accuracy), suggesting low annota-tion artifacts or answer biases. 

# Knowledge Module Learning 

In this section, we introduce our proposed Knowledge Mod-ule Learning (KML) for procedural knowledge reasoning, which effectively handles uncertain (probabilistic) inputs while producing interpretable reasoning outputs using a small number of trainable parameters. We train a collection of neural networks known as Neural Knowledge Module (KM ) to represent each binary relation type of PKG. Then given a video and a question, we ask LLM to generate a pro-gram consisting of KM invocations to answer the questions. Then we execute those KMs sequentially with the grounded evidence extracted from the video to obtain the final answer. Next, we present the details. 

Knowledge Module Learning. For each binary relation type Rk(Ei, Ej ) in the PKG that maps from entity type Ei

to Ej , we learn a KM as a learnable neural relation ( ϕRk )with parameters ( θRk ). KM learns to map from a given head entity ei ∈ E i to the corresponding set of tail entities Ij

where Ij ⊆ E j of relation Rk as follows: 

ϕRk ( x(ei; θx); θRk ) → ej (1) where x(ei; θx) is a d-dimensional embeddings of the head entity and ej is a vector that is closer to x(ej )

for all ej ∈ Ij . Here, Ij is the set of tail entities un-der relation Rk for the head entity ei or formally Ij := 

{ej ∈ E | Rk(ei, e j ) = T rue }. Then the objective of KM learning is to make sure to learn (θRk , θ x) such that for each head entity embedding x(ei) can be mapped to a vector ej

that is representative of all corresponding tail entities Ij . We iterate over all the triplets (including the inverse triplets) of all relation types of PKG in a batch-learning manner and train the KMs using the contrastive loss. 

−log exp ( ej·x(ej ) 

> τ

)

P 

> ∀ep∈B

exp ( ej·x(ep) 

> τ

) (2) Here B is the set of tail entities in the batch of triplets ex-cluding Ij , ej ∈ I j is one of the positive target entity for 

ei under Rk, and τ is the temperature. Note that we L2 nor-malize all embeddings and the vector ej before computing the contrastive loss. Contrastive loss plays a crucial role in learning neural relation functions ϕRk (i.e. KMs), for mod-elling symbolic binary relations of the form Rk(Ei, Ej ).The embedding learning function x(; θx) is implemented using CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) text encoder embeddings with frozen parameters ( θx). Alternatively, we also learn the embedding function from scratch using standard implemen-tations 2. Similarly, we also learn the inverse KM for each inverse relation R∗k(Ej , Ei) of each relation Rk. Let us de-note the set of all KMs by ϕR = {ϕRk |k = 1 , · · · } .At inference, KM takes an input embedding and maps that to an output embedding that represents a set of correspond-ing tail entities of that relation. For example, Table 3 shows the semantic meaning of each output embedding that maps to a set of tail entities of relation HAS TOOL for given input embedding of the Step entity. We experimented with differ-ent neural configurations of multi-layered perceptron (MLP) and found that two-layered MLP with Tanh activation per-forms the best for learning KMs. Next, we present how to answer questions using KMs and LLM generated programs. 

Question Answering. Given the video v, the question Q,and options Y = {y1, · · · , y n} (n = 5) we prompt a LLM ϕ() to find the relevant entity type ( Eg ) that should be grounded in the video to answer the question. 

ϕ(Q, PKGS ) → Eg (3) For example, Eg can be a task, step, object or action. Then we find the entity instance(s) that is present in the given video V of the entity type Eg using a vision foundation model (VLM) as follows: VLM (V, E g ) → xe (4) 

> 2We learn these using torch.nn.Embedding 24552

where xe ∈ R C represents the score vector for the entity type (e.g., step distribution) across all categories of that en-tity type. We assume there are C categories for entity type 

Eg . To obtain estimates about the grounding entity Eg , we use ProceduralVRL (P.VRL) (Zhong et al. 2023) a VLM tai-lored for procedural tasks. Given the collection of Knowledge Module names ( ϕR)and the question Q, and the grounded entity type Eg , we use LLM (denoted by ϕG() ) to generate a list of sequence of Knowledge module invocations (known as program or P1)to answer the question. Using a similar concept to chain-of-thought (Wei et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022), tree-of-thought (Yao et al. 2023), and graph-of-thought (Besta et al. 2024) we ask the LLM to generate multiple alternative pro-grams to answer the same questions. 

ϕG(Q, ϕ R, E g ) = [ P1 = ϕri , ϕ rj , ϕ rk , ... , ·, (5) 

Pl = ϕri , ϕ rj , ϕ rk , ... ]

Here Pl is the specific module invocations and each Pl

may result in different answers following an alternative-thought of reasoning approach. The LLM module ϕG() 

can be implemented with any LLM with good reasoning capability. We use a special prompt that invokes deep understanding and consistent knowledge graph traversal and alternative thought invocations– see (Nguyen et al. 2025) for more details on the prompt. As an example, to answer the question what is an alternative tool that can be used for this step? 

it generates the following program of modules.         

> HAS TOOL(Step) →Tool HAS PURPOSE(Tool) →Purpose SIMILAR PURPOSE(Purpose) →Purpose PURPOSE TO TOOL(Purpose) →Tool

where PURPOSE TO TOOL(Purpose) is the inverse rela-tion of HAS PURPOSE(Tool). LLM may generate multiple programs that leads to the answer, typically 3-5 alternatives for complex problems. To predict the answer, we execute each program in order, inputting the grounded entity rep-resentation zi into the first module. For each program ( P1

to Pl), zi is fed into the first module to obtain intermediate embedding, invoking all modules sequentially. For example 

zj = ϕri (zi) then zk = ϕrj (zj ) and finally zf = ϕrk (zk).Therefore the final embedding representing the answer to the given question is zf . We can also inspect the meaning of each intermediate representation as shown in Table 3 allowing more interpretable reasoning that can handle uncertain inputs. To compute the first input embedding zi, we use the grounded top-K entity instance and weight the embeddings of each grounded entity instance category name as follows: 

zi = S × XeT (6) 

Xe = [ x(e1), x (e2), · · · , x (ek)] (7) where ek is the k-th category of the entity type Eg and S =[s1, s 2, · · · , s k] is a vector containing top-k scores for each grounded entity-type category (e.g. Step categories). 

Inference. Given the options Y = {y1, . . . , y n}, we obtain the embeddings of Y , i.e., x(Y ) = [ x(y1), x (y2), · · · x(yn)] .Then we compute the cosine similarity between the final embedding zf and x(Y ) and apply softmax to predict the answer index for each program. When there are alternative programs, we take the maximum score from all programs as the final answer. 

VQA Training for KML. We also fine-tune the KMs us-ing a few examples of the video-question-answer using our dataset. We compute the cosine similarity between zf and 

x(Y ) and apply softmax to predict the answer index. 

ˆy = sof tmax (cosine sim (x(Y ), z f )) (8) Then we train all KMs jointly using the cross-entropy loss over the correct answer index. At test time, we predict the right answer using the argmax of the cosine similar-ity scores. One of the advantages of KML (auto-program) approach is that, given the relation types, we do not need to manually select any neural modules, or generate pro-grams manually. We use LLMs such as GPT, DeepSeek or Mistral. More implementation details of KML is presented in (Nguyen et al. 2025). 

# Experiments 

Experimental Setup 

We conduct experiments on the PKR-QA benchmark to evaluate the effectiveness of VLMs and Neurosymbolic methods for procedural knowledge-based question answer-ing. We use NVIDIA A100 GPUs (80GB VRAM) for con-ducting experiments with VLMs, NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 Ti and A5000 GPUs for training KML, and RTX 3090 GPUs (24GB VRAM) for training knowledge graph embed-ding methods. 

VLM Evaluation Settings. We evaluate VLMs under five different settings to assess their procedural knowledge rea-soning ability: (1) Zero-shot : VLMs take a video segment (8 uniformly sampled frames), a question, and options as in-put; (2) VLM+P.VRL : VLMs take a video segment (8 uni-formly sampled frames), a question, options, and the top-5 step/task categories from P.VRL as input; (3) KG-training :VLMs are tuned using the triplet instances of our PKG as questions using LoRA (Hu et al. 2021) and then evaluate the fine-tuned VLMs with PKR-QA; (4) QA training : VLMs are tuned using LoRA for 100 epochs with 4 randomly sam-pled frames as input, demonstrating the impact of few-shot fine-tuning. All models are trained using the training set of 1,700 question-answer pairs; (5) KG+QA training : VLMs are tuned using triplet instances following KG-training, and 1,700 question-answer pairs as described in QA training. 

Neurosymbolic Methods. We explore three variants of KML, differing in how the embedding function x(; θx) is implemented. In KML-F-CLIP , x(; θx) is a frozen CLIP text encoder. In KML-CLIP , we initialize x(; θx) with CLIP embeddings and fine-tune its parameters. In KML-Rand , θx

is learned from scratch (i.e., randomly initialized). We com-pare our KML against the following NS methods: 

Inference by Graph Propagation (IGP) :We implement a simple NS baseline that uses a given program and a set of grounded entities with associated probabilities or logits to 24553 answer questions. Given a directed knowledge graph with binary relations, we propagate uncertainty from grounded entities through the relations specified in the program. Us-ing breadth-first traversal, we accumulate scores at each tar-get entity by summing the propagated logits. This approach resembles probabilistic logic-based inference. 

KG Embedding Methods: We compare against standard KG embedding models, including TransE (Bordes et al. 2013), TransH (Wang et al. 2014), and RotatE (Sun et al. 2019). After training, we use LLM-generated programs (as in KML) to perform multi-hop reasoning. These models are selected for their support of compositional reasoning. Em-bedding dimensions are tuned on a validation set, yielding optimal sizes of 256 for TransE, 100 for TransH, and 256 for RotatE. We also include variants with CLIP-initialized entity and relation embeddings to enable direct comparison with CLIP-based KML models. 

Modern NS methods : We compare with modern NS meth-ods including ViperGPT (Sur´ ıs, Menon, and Vondrick 2023) that uses the power of LLM and vision models, and MAC (Hudson and Manning 2018). We evaluate MAC on a classification-based VQA task, using a single image frame and a question (without answer choices) as input. The model predicts from 2,079 answer classes aggregated from the dataset. We use GloVe (Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014) embeddings for text and extract visual features with a pretrained ResNet101 (He et al. 2016). We tuned the em-bedding size, MAC hidden size, and the number of MAC layers, selecting the best setup based on validation perfor-mance. The comparison with NS methods such as (Jaiswal et al. 2025; Li et al. 2025) are left for future work. 

Metrics. Since VLM-generated text may not exactly match the predefined multiple-choice options, we adopt the filter-ing and MCQ accuracy computation strategy from (Yue et al. 2024; Lin et al. 2023). We report both overall accuracy and mean accuracy for each model. Accuracy is computed as the average score across all test samples, while mean accuracy 

(mAcc) is the average of per-template accuracies, providing equal weight to each traversal template. 

Analysis and Discussion Benchmarking VLMs on PKR-QA. Table 1 compares the performance of various VLMs across five training and inference settings, revealing several key insights. Provid-ing predicted step and task information from Procedu-ralVRL (VLM+P.VRL) consistently improves performance over the zero-shot setting. These gains highlight the impor-tance of grounded procedural context in enhancing reason-ing, even for strong models like MiniCPM-V and Qwen2.5-VL. Training on KG triplets yields some improvement over zero-shot baselines, though the gains are modest and less consistent, suggesting that aligning symbolic represen-tations with multimodal inputs remains non-trivial. QA-based fine-tuning leads to larger improvements, particu-larly for MiniCPM-V and Qwen2.5-VL. These gains indi-cate that VLMs are capable of adapting to task-specific su-pervision, even when provided with a relatively small num-ber of QA pairs (1,700 samples). The best performance is achieved when combining both KG and QA training , with Setting Model Acc mAcc                                       

> Zero-shot DeepSeek-VL2 (27.4B) (Wu et al. 2024) 58.4 55.4 MiniCPM-V (8B) (Yao et al. 2024) 62.6 59.7 mPLUG-Owl3 (7B) (Ye et al. 2024) 63.1 60.2 Qwen2.5-VL (7B) (Bai et al. 2025) 59.6 57.8 VideoChat2-HD (7B) (Li et al. 2023) 61.2 58.4 VLM + P.VRL DeepSeek-VL2 (27.4B) (Wu et al. 2024) 64.5 59.9 MiniCPM-V (8B) (Yao et al. 2024) 67.4 63.8 mPLUG-Owl3 (7B) (Ye et al. 2024) 65.5 61.6 Qwen2.5-VL (7B) (Bai et al. 2025) 69.4 65.8 VideoChat2-HD (7B) (Li et al. 2023) 65.5 59.9 KG-training MiniCPM-V (8B) (Yao et al. 2024) 63.5 61.0 mPLUG-Owl3 (7B) (Ye et al. 2024) 64.8 61.4 Qwen2.5-VL (7B) (Bai et al. 2025) 67.3 64.1 QA training MiniCPM-V (8B) (Yao et al. 2024) 71.1 71.4 mPLUG-Owl3 (7B) (Ye et al. 2024) 71.8 72.4 Qwen2.5-VL (7B) (Bai et al. 2025) 73.6 73.4 KG+QA training MiniCPM-V(8B) (Yao et al. 2024) 72.1 72.1 mPLUG-Owl3 (7B) (Ye et al. 2024) 73.1 73.8
> Qwen2.5-VL (7B) (Bai et al. 2025) 74.2 73.8

Table 1: Comparison of VLMs in different settings. Under-lined scores denote the best-performing method within each setting, while bold scores highlight the best overall.                                      

> Setting Model Acc mAcc
> No Training / No Program ViperGPT 41.6 40.9 GPT-4o + P.VRL 71.2 69.0 Program Only IGP (+P.VRL) 62.8 60.0 QA training Only MAC 11.6 20.0 KG-training TransE 63.6 51.6 TransH 73.1 66.3 RotatE 41.6 29.2 TransE+CLIP 56.8 45.4 TransH+CLIP 70.6 65.9 RotatE+CLIP 48.8 35.2 KML-F-CLIP (Ours) 74.6 71.6 KML-Rand (Ours) 73.5 70.0 KML-CLIP (Ours) 75.3 71.5 KG+QA training KML-F-CLIP (Ours) 76.7 75.3 KML-Rand (Ours) 77.4 76.3 KML-CLIP (Ours) 78.1 77.1

Table 2: Performance comparison of NS methods. Qwen2.5-VL reaching 74.2/73.8, indicating that integrating structured procedural knowledge with task-specific exam-ples provides complementary benefits for enhancing proce-dural understanding in VLMs. 

Benchmarking Neurosymbolic Methods. As shown in Table 2, all KML variants outperform all baselines, confirm-ing the benefit of executing LLM-generated KG-traversal programs with relation-specific KMs for procedural rea-soning QA. KML achieves the highest performance un-der KG+QA training using KML-CLIP variant. The per-formance of KML-Rand is not far from KML-F-CLIP and interestingly, when tuned with KG+QA training the KML-Rand performs better than KML-F-CLIP under the same setting. ViperGPT performs poorly on our benchmark due to the absence of built-in reasoning operators and reliance on predefined program templates that are not suited for the structured reasoning required in procedural knowledge tasks. IGP suffers from combinatorial explosion and poor 24554 grounding, often generating irrelevant results from uncer-tain starting nodes. In contrast, KML handles such uncer-tainty better by grounding traversal via learned knowledge modules. MAC , originally designed for visual reasoning tasks (e.g., answering questions like “What is to the left of the green box?”), fails in our setting due to its lack of ac-cess to external procedural knowledge. Among KG embed-ding methods , TransE and TransH perform better due to their additive or projective composition, aligning well with our program-based reasoning. RotatE underperforms, likely because its complex-valued, rotation-based composition is less effective for multi-hop reasoning. CLIP-based initial-ization yields mixed results—improving RotatE but degrad-ing TransE and TransH—indicating varying alignment with visual semantics across models. We also evaluate GPT-4o 

using top-5 predicted step/task category names from P.VRL. It achieves 71.2% accuracy and 69.0% mean accuracy. 

KML’s Interpretability. One key advantage of KML is its interpretability, as illustrated in the qualitative example in Table 3. We observe step-by-step reasoning and interme-diate interpretations from the learned embeddings, offering insight into the model’s decision process. The output entities represented by the output vectors of each KM seems reason-able and accurate for the given task. 

KML’s Generalizability. To assess KML’s generalizabil-ity, we added ten binary relations from the STAR bench-mark . KML-F-CLIP achieved 74.9% on Interaction and 76.7% on Feasibility questions, outperforming prior bests of 71.8% (Jaiswal et al. 2025) and 62.4% (Yu et al. 2023). For Sequence and Prediction questions, it scored 57.3% and 49.8%, respectively. We also trained KML-F-CLIP us-ing a GPT-4o-generated KG from 7,687 WikiHow tasks (57,027 steps, 8.7M triplets) capturing tools, actions, ob-jects, and purposes. Evaluated on our PKR-QA dataset, it achieved 73.9% mean accuracy, rising to 74.9% with KG+QA training, suggesting that while generic KGs help, domain-specific modules remain advantageous. 

KML’s Robustness. Figure 2 (left) shows KML’s perfor-mance using top-k step/task predictions ( k = 1 to 5). Using all top-5 predictions yields the best QA performance, while top-1 predictions still achieve strong results, demonstrating the model’s robustness to imperfect inputs. Figure 2 (right) reports a moderate correlation (0.24) between step predic-tion accuracy and QA accuracy, suggesting KML does not heavily depend on input quality, benefiting from embedding-based reasoning and generalizable knowledge modules. 

KML Ablation. We train KML modules from scratch us-ing only QA training, with KML-F-CLIP achieving 59.3% mean accuracy—highlighting the value of training on PKG data. KML allows exploration of multiple programs per question (see (Nguyen et al. 2025)), though gains over single-program use are marginal. It also supports expert program editing for improved reliability. Evaluating differ-ent LLMs for program generation in KML-F-CLIP, GPT-4o leads with 71.6% accuracy, followed by LLaMA-3-8B (68.4), DeepSeek-V2.5 (66.5), Mistral-7B (66.2), and Qwen-2.5 (63.7), showing KML’s robustness across LLMs.         

> Q. What is the other task that use the tool in this video for the same purpose? Task: Make Orange Juice Step: pour the orange juice into the cup
> HAS TOOL TOOL TO STEP STEP TO TASK
> Out= Tool Out= Step Out= Task
> cup (0.361) pour into the ingredients (0.337) MakeCookie (0.221) mug (0.273) pour in after mix it (0.314) MakeCocktail (0.208) measuring cup (0.253) add some ingredients to the tea (0.308) MakeHomemadeIceCream (0.191) yogurt (0.249) add some ingredients in the coffee (0.307) MakeChocolate (0.188) bottle (0.223) pour the ingredients into the bowl (0.293) MakeCoffee (0.185)

Table 3: Three-hop Reasoning using KML-F-CLIP: The step-by-step reasoning outputs of KML with estimated prob-ability value over the domain of relation using embeddings. 

Figure 2: (Left) QA performance of KML-F-CLIP using top-1 to top-5 grounded entities from P.VRL. (Right) Cor-relation between step prediction accuracy and QA accuracy. 

# Conclusion 

Our PKR-QA is a benchmark for procedural knowledge reasoning where VLMs demonstrate capability in procedu-ral knowledge. However, their closed-loop reasoning lack the transparency, controllability, and domain-specific con-straints required for mission-critical applications such as medical procedures or industrial automation. In contrast, the proposed Knowledge Module Learning (KML) frame-work explicitly grounds reasoning in procedural knowl-edge graphs and decouples hypothesis generation (via LLM-based program synthesis) from structured execution. By constraining reasoning to predefined operations, KML en-sures reliability and interpretability without sacrificing per-formance. Our experiments highlight the promise of such neurosymbolic architectures, where lightweight, domain-aware modules (trained directly on KG relations) performs well in knowledge-intensive reasoning. 

# Acknowledgments 

This research is supported by the National Research Foun-dation, Singapore, under its NRF Fellowship (Award# NRF-NRFF14-2022-0001) and by funding allocation to Basura Fernando by the A*STAR under its SERC Central Research Fund (CRF), as well as its Centre for Frontier AI Research. 24555 References 

Andreas, J.; Rohrbach, M.; Darrell, T.; and Klein, D. 2016. Learning to compose neural networks for question answer-ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1601.01705 .Ashutosh, K.; Ramakrishnan, S. K.; Afouras, T.; and Grau-man, K. 2024. Video-mined task graphs for keystep recogni-tion in instructional videos. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36. Bai, S.; Chen, K.; Liu, X.; Wang, J.; Ge, W.; Song, S.; Dang, K.; Wang, P.; Wang, S.; Tang, J.; et al. 2025. Qwen2. 5-VL Technical Report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13923 .Besta, M.; Blach, N.; Kubicek, A.; Gerstenberger, R.; Podstawski, M.; Gianinazzi, L.; Gajda, J.; Lehmann, T.; Niewiadomski, H.; Nyczyk, P.; et al. 2024. Graph of thoughts: Solving elaborate problems with large language models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artifi-cial Intelligence , volume 38, 17682–17690. Bordes, A.; Usunier, N.; Garcia-Duran, A.; Weston, J.; and Yakhnenko, O. 2013. Translating embeddings for modeling multi-relational data. Advances in neural information pro-cessing systems , 26. Chen, W.; Gan, Z.; Li, L.; Cheng, Y.; Wang, W.; and Liu, J. 2021. Meta module network for compositional visual rea-soning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision , 655–664. Choudhury, R.; Niinuma, K.; Kitani, K. M.; and Jeni, L. A. 2024. Video Question Answering with Procedural Pro-grams. In European Conference on Computer Vision , 315– 332. Springer. Endo, M.; Hsu, J.; Li, J.; and Wu, J. 2023. Motion question answering via modular motion programs. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 9312–9328. PMLR. Francis, N.; Green, A.; Guagliardo, P.; Libkin, L.; Lindaaker, T.; Marsault, V.; Plantikow, S.; Rydberg, M.; Selmer, P.; and Taylor, A. 2018. Cypher: An evolving query language for property graphs. In Proceedings of the 2018 international conference on management of data , 1433–1445. He, K.; Zhang, X.; Ren, S.; and Sun, J. 2016. Deep resid-ual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-tion , 770–778. Hoang, L.; Liausvia, F.; Liu, Y.; and Nguyen, T.-S. 2024. Semi-automated Construction of Complex Knowledge Base Question Answering Dataset Using Large Language Model. In Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases , 230–248. Springer. Hu, E. J.; Shen, Y.; Wallis, P.; Allen-Zhu, Z.; Li, Y.; Wang, S.; Wang, L.; and Chen, W. 2021. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685 .Hudson, D.; and Manning, C. D. 2019. Learning by abstrac-tion: The neural state machine. Advances in neural informa-tion processing systems , 32. Hudson, D. A.; and Manning, C. D. 2018. Compositional attention networks for machine reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.03067 .Hurst, A.; Lerer, A.; Goucher, A. P.; Perelman, A.; Ramesh, A.; Clark, A.; Ostrow, A.; Welihinda, A.; Hayes, A.; Rad-ford, A.; et al. 2024. GPT-4o System Card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21276 .Jaiswal, S.; Roy, D.; Fernando, B.; and Tan, C. 2025. Learn-ing to Reason Iteratively and Parallelly for Complex Visual Reasoning Scenarios. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 37: 137965–137998. Johnson, J.; Hariharan, B.; Van Der Maaten, L.; Hoffman, J.; Fei-Fei, L.; Lawrence Zitnick, C.; and Girshick, R. 2017. Inferring and executing programs for visual reasoning. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on com-puter vision , 2989–2998. Lei, J.; Yu, L.; Berg, T. L.; and Bansal, M. 2019. Tvqa+: Spatio-temporal grounding for video question answering. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.11574 .Li, C.; Sugandhika, C.; Ee, Y. K.; Peh, E.; Zhang, H.; Yang, H.; Rajan, D.; and Fernando, B. 2025. IMoRe: Implicit Program-Guided Reasoning for Human Motion Q&A. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , 12987–12996. Li, K.; He, Y.; Wang, Y.; Li, Y.; Wang, W.; Luo, P.; Wang, Y.; Wang, L.; and Qiao, Y. 2023. Videochat: Chat-centric video understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06355 .Lin, B. Y.; Chen, X.; Chen, J.; and Ren, X. 2019. Kagnet: Knowledge-aware graph networks for commonsense reason-ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.02151 .Lin, J.; Yin, H.; Ping, W.; Lu, Y.; Molchanov, P.; Tao, A.; Mao, H.; Kautz, J.; Shoeybi, M.; and Han, S. 2023. VILA: On Pre-training for Visual Language Models. arXiv:2312.07533. Ma, Y.; Wang, Y.; Wu, Y.; Lyu, Z.; Chen, S.; Li, X.; and Qiao, Y. 2022. Visual knowledge graph for human action reasoning in videos. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM Inter-national Conference on Multimedia , 4132–4141. Mascharka, D.; Tran, P.; Soklaski, R.; and Majumdar, A. 2018. Transparency by design: Closing the gap between performance and interpretability in visual reasoning. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 4942–4950. Min, J.; Buch, S.; Nagrani, A.; Cho, M.; and Schmid, C. 2024. Morevqa: Exploring modular reasoning models for video question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,13235–13245. Nguyen, T.-S.; Yang, H.; Neoh, T. Y.; Zhang, H.; Keat, E. Y.; and Fernando, B. 2025. Neuro Symbolic Knowledge Rea-soning for Procedural Video Question Answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14957 .Parmar, P.; Peh, E.; Chen, R.; Lam, T. E.; Chen, Y.; Tan, E.; and Fernando, B. 2024. Causalchaos! dataset for compre-hensive causal action question answering over longer causal chains grounded in dynamic visual scenes. Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , 37: 92769–92802. Pennington, J.; Socher, R.; and Manning, C. D. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for word representation. In Proceedings of 24556 the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural lan-guage processing (EMNLP) , 1532–1543. Perez, E.; Strub, F.; De Vries, H.; Dumoulin, V.; and Courville, A. 2018. Film: Visual reasoning with a general conditioning layer. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 32. Radford, A.; Kim, J. W.; Hallacy, C.; Ramesh, A.; Goh, G.; Agarwal, S.; Sastry, G.; Askell, A.; Mishkin, P.; Clark, J.; et al. 2021. Learning transferable visual models from nat-ural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning , 8748–8763. PMLR. Reimers, N.; and Gurevych, I. 2019. Sentence-BERT: Sen-tence Embeddings using Siamese BERT-Networks. In Pro-ceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing . Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Sadhu, A.; Gupta, T.; Yatskar, M.; Nevatia, R.; and Kemb-havi, A. 2021. Visual semantic role labeling for video un-derstanding. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 5589–5600. Shah, M.; Cahoon, J.; Milletari, M.; Tian, J.; Psallidas, F.; Mueller, A.; and Litombe, N. 2024. Improving LLM-based KGQA for multi-hop Question Answering with implicit rea-soning in few-shot examples. In Biswas, R.; Kaffee, L.-A.; Agarwal, O.; Minervini, P.; Singh, S.; and de Melo, G., eds., Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Knowledge Graphs and Large Language Models (KaLLM 2024) , 125– 135. Bangkok, Thailand: Association for Computational Linguistics. Speer, R.; Chin, J.; and Havasi, C. 2017. Conceptnet 5.5: An open multilingual graph of general knowledge. In Pro-ceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence ,volume 31. Sun, Z.; Deng, Z.-H.; Nie, J.-Y.; and Tang, J. 2019. Rotate: Knowledge graph embedding by relational rotation in com-plex space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.10197 .Sur´ ıs, D.; Menon, S.; and Vondrick, C. 2023. Vipergpt: Visual inference via python execution for reasoning. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , 11888–11898. Tang, Y.; Ding, D.; Rao, Y.; Zheng, Y.; Zhang, D.; Zhao, L.; Lu, J.; and Zhou, J. 2019. Coin: A large-scale dataset for comprehensive instructional video analysis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-tern Recognition , 1207–1216. Wang, A.; Wu, B.; Chen, S.; Chen, Z.; Guan, H.; Lee, W.-N.; Li, L. E.; and Gan, C. 2024. SOK-Bench: A Situated Video Reasoning Benchmark with Aligned Open-World Knowl-edge. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition , 13384–13394. Wang, X.; Wei, J.; Schuurmans, D.; Le, Q.; Chi, E.; Narang, S.; Chowdhery, A.; and Zhou, D. 2022. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171 .Wang, Z.; Zhang, J.; Feng, J.; and Chen, Z. 2014. Knowl-edge graph embedding by translating on hyperplanes. In 

Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelli-gence , volume 28. Wei, J.; Wang, X.; Schuurmans, D.; Bosma, M.; Xia, F.; Chi, E.; Le, Q. V.; Zhou, D.; et al. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language mod-els. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35: 24824–24837. Wu, Z.; Chen, X.; Pan, Z.; Liu, X.; Liu, W.; Dai, D.; Gao, H.; Ma, Y.; Wu, C.; Wang, B.; et al. 2024. Deepseek-vl2: Mixture-of-experts vision-language models for advanced multimodal understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.10302 .Yao, S.; Yu, D.; Zhao, J.; Shafran, I.; Griffiths, T.; Cao, Y.; and Narasimhan, K. 2023. Tree of thoughts: Deliber-ate problem solving with large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36: 11809–11822. Yao, Y.; Yu, T.; Zhang, A.; Wang, C.; Cui, J.; Zhu, H.; Cai, T.; Li, H.; Zhao, W.; He, Z.; et al. 2024. MiniCPM-V: A GPT-4V Level MLLM on Your Phone. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.01800 .Ye, J.; Xu, H.; Liu, H.; Hu, A.; Yan, M.; Qian, Q.; Zhang, J.; Huang, F.; and Zhou, J. 2024. mplug-owl3: Towards long image-sequence understanding in multi-modal large language models. In The Thirteenth International Confer-ence on Learning Representations .Yu, S.; Cho, J.; Yadav, P.; and Bansal, M. 2023. Self-chained image-language model for video localization and question answering. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , 36: 76749–76771. Yue, X.; Ni, Y.; Zhang, K.; Zheng, T.; Liu, R.; Zhang, G.; Stevens, S.; Jiang, D.; Ren, W.; Sun, Y.; Wei, C.; Yu, B.; Yuan, R.; Sun, R.; Yin, M.; Zheng, B.; Yang, Z.; Liu, Y.; Huang, W.; Sun, H.; Su, Y.; and Chen, W. 2024. MMMU: A Massive Multi-discipline Multimodal Understanding and Reasoning Benchmark for Expert AGI. In Proceedings of CVPR .Zhong, Y.; Yu, L.; Bai, Y.; Li, S.; Yan, X.; and Li, Y. 2023. Learning procedure-aware video representation from instructional videos and their narrations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 14825–14835. Zhong, Z.; Zhong, L.; Sun, Z.; Jin, Q.; Qin, Z.; and Zhang, X. 2024. SyntheT2C: Generating Synthetic Data for Fine-Tuning Large Language Models on the Text2Cypher Task. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.10710 .Zhou, H.; Mart´ ın-Mart´ ın, R.; Kapadia, M.; Savarese, S.; and Niebles, J. C. 2023. Procedure-aware pretraining for instruc-tional video understanding. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,10727–10738. 24557